
87052068

Circulation 8703; 74(6):1371-8

Angioplasty, Transluminal/*AE/MT; Comparative Study; Coronary Disease/*CO/RA/SU; Coronary Vessels/*IN/RA/SU; Emergencies; Human; Prognosis; Time Factors.

Coronary dissection and total coronary occlusion associated with percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty: significance of initial angiographic morphology of coronary stenoses.

JOURNAL ARTICLE.

Coronary dissection and total coronary occlusion leading to emergency coronary surgery are the most frequent complications of percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) and their occurrence usually is unpredictable. To identify angiographic characteristics of coronary stenoses that may affect the incidence of these complications, the diagnostic pre-PTCA coronary angiograms of 38 consecutive patients (group I) undergoing emergency coronary surgery for dissection or occlusion were reviewed and compared with the angiograms of a random sample of 38 patients (stratified for left anterior descending and right coronary arteries) from a group of 1151 who did not need emergency coronary surgery (group II). Stenosis morphology before angioplasty was considered  complicated  if at least one of the following criteria was present: irregular borders, intraluminal lucency, and localization of stenosis in curve or at bifurcation. Baseline characteristics, maximum inflation pressures, types of balloon catheters used, and routinely registered angiographic stenosis properties (severity, length, eccentricity, and calcification) were similar in both groups. Irregular borders before PTCA were present in 22 of 38 patients in group I vs 10 of 38 in group II (p less than .05), intraluminal lucency in 22 of 38 vs nine of 38 (p less than .05), localization in curve in 27 of 38 pts vs 16 of 38 (p less than .05), and localization at bifurcation in 11 of 38 vs 15 of 38 (NS). Complicated angiographic morphology of coronary stenosis may represent a risk factor for dissection or occlusion. Therefore, although the predictive value of these findings is low, detailed evaluation of angiographic morphology of coronary stenoses may improve patient selection and reduce complication rates of PTCA.

Ischinger T; Gruentzig AR; Meier B; Galan K.


